TI Recipe: Ensure each production component has at least one Datadog SLO (#1072)
RoadieHQ/marketing-site: content/docs/tech-insights/track-datadog-slos/index.md

---
title: Track Datadog SLOs
publishedDate: '2023-07-25T18:15:00.0Z'
description: How to track and visualize Datadog SLOs with Roadie Tech Insights
---

As a platform team it is important to measure the reliability and performance of services, and Datadog provides powerful tools to monitor and track them. Creating and monitoring Datadog Service Level Objectives (SLOs) is one way to do it. Defining SLOs across multiple components can be an objective as well, and with Tech Insights your team is now able to manage these.

### **Prerequisites**

Before you begin, make sure you have the following:

- A Datadog account: Sign up for a Datadog account if you don't have one already.

> - Access to your system's components: Ensure you have the necessary permissions to access the components you want to track.

Reviewer: It's not totally clear to me what this means. Do I need access to the Backstage components, or the Datadog "services"? Maybe explain why we're going to need the access. That will make it more clear.

- Defined SLOs in at least one of the components.

> With Roadie’s Tech Insights feature, there’s an easier way. In this tutorial, we’re going to:

Reviewer: This is slightly different content than the "Prerequisites". I'd recommend splitting this out into it's own section called "What you'll learn"

2. How to detect which component has SLO defined with Tech Insights.
3. How to use a comparison operator.

Let’s get started.

## Setup Datadog integration

In order to collect the Datadog SLO count from each component, the datadog integration needs to be set up on Roadie. To do that follow these steps:

### Administration → Settings → Datadog

Set the hostname of your datadog app.

### Administration → Settings → Secrets

Set the `Datadog API Token` and `Datadog APP Token` in order for your Roadie instance to contact your Datadog app.

| Key          | Token             |
| ------------ | ----------------- |
| DD_API_TOKEN | Datadog API Token |
| DD_APP_TOKEN | Datadog APP Token |

## Record the SLO count for each component

In order to know which software has Datadog SLOs configured, we’re going to use the built-in Datadog Data Source in Roadie Tech Insights. It will run periodically and extract the SLO count from each component.

These are the steps to set that up.

1. Visit Tech Insights and click into the Data Sources tab. Search for the Datadog Data Source from the Data Sources list an select it.

   ![Data Source Listing](./datasources_list.png)

> 2. You may need to wait some time for the data source to collect all SLOs and Monitors from Datadog. It must contact the Datadog APIs for each component which is captured by the already set filter.

Reviewer: We're missing a step here I think. Don't we need to teach the user how to set the annotations on some components so that this DS will work?

  - `datadoghq.com/slo_tag`: The Datadog SLO tag to use for this component. This is the tag that will be used to filter the components that have SLOs defined.
  - `datadoghq.com/monitor_tags`: The Datadog SLO target to use for this component. This are the monitor tags that will be used to filter the components that have Monitors defined in Datadog.

### **What you'll learn**

In this tutorial, we’re going to:

- Set up Datadog integration.
- Automatically scan Components in the Backstage catalog and record how many SLOs are defined for each.
- Visualize the distribution of SLOs defined count.
- Create a check to verify if at least one SLO is defined for each component.

As we go through this process, you’ll learn:

- How to use built-in Data Sources (Datadog) and how to create Checks with Tech Insights.
- How to detect which component has SLO defined with Tech Insights.
- How to use a comparison operator.

Let's get started.

## 1 - Setup Datadog integration

In order to collect the Datadog SLO count from each component, the Datadog integration needs to be set up on Roadie. To do that, follow these steps:

> ### 1.1 - Administration → Settings → Datadog
> 
> Set the hostname of your Datadog app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Go to _Administration → Settings → Datadog_ and set the hostname of your Datadog app.
```

> ### 1.2 - Administration → Settings → Secrets
> 
> Set the `Datadog API Token` and `Datadog APP Token` in order for your Roadie instance to contact your Datadog app.
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Go to _Administration → Settings → Secrets_  and set the `Datadog API Token` and `Datadog APP Token` in so your Roadie instance to contact your Datadog app.
```

| Key          | Token             |
| ------------ | ----------------- |
| DD_API_TOKEN | Datadog API Token |
| DD_APP_TOKEN | Datadog APP Token |

## Record the SLO count for each component

In order to know which software has Datadog SLOs configured, we’re going to use the built-in Datadog Data Source in Roadie Tech Insights. It will run periodically and extract the SLO count from each component.

These are the steps to set that up.

1. Visit Tech Insights and click into the Data Sources tab. Search for the Datadog Data Source from the Data Sources list and select it.

   ![Data Source Listing](./datasources_list.png)

> 2. You may need to wait some time for the data source to collect all SLOs and Monitors from Datadog. It must contact the Datadog APIs for each component, which is captured by the already set filter.

Reviewer 2: Might be useful to add more details on what this filter is about (who sets it, when, can it be changed).

   ![Data Source Results](./datasource_results.png)

## Visualize the distribution of SLOs count

Our Data Source comes with a built-in visualization panel that lets us get an overview of the SLO counts present in each configured and annotated component. When viewing a Data Source, expand the “Facts visualization” section to see it.

![Data Source Visualization](./datasource_graph.png)

> This chart tells us:

Reviewer 2: You've been using "you" as a subject throughout most of the article. It's better not to change it to "us" now, but keep it all consistent. The case of "our data source" a bit before this paragraph is also confusing: does it refer to the data source usage you described just now or to Roadie's implementation

1. 33% of the Components that this Data Source targets have 1 SLO defined and configured.
2. 33% of the Components that this Data Source targets have 2 SLOs defined and configured.
3. 33% of the Components that this Data Source targets have no SLOs configured.

> In the next section, we will create a Check that can show a pass or fail result to app dev teams to tell them if they are missing any component that doesn’t have an SLO defined.

Reviewer 2: Considering re-phrasing this sentence, perhaps splitting it into two sentences? I'm not quite sure about what you want to say exactly

## Create a check that shows which software doesn’t have an SLO defined and configured

> Now that we can determine which components are using Dockerfiles, and we can extract the base image version from those files, let’s write a check to combine both of these properties.

Reviewer 2: When did Dockerfiles come into play?

1. Visit Tech Insights and click into the Checks tab. Click the ADD CHECK button to create a new check.

   ![Checks Listing](./checks_overview.png)

2. Give the check a sensible name, like “Apps must have at least one Datadog SLO”, and a description like “Having Datadog SLOs configured for each component is important to measure the reliability and performance of services on a global scale.”

   ![Create a Check](./create_check.png)

> 3. In the Conditions section, we’re going to create a condition that compares against the Datadog Slo facts retrieved from the data source.

Reviewer 2: I think the notion of a 'fact' is rather blurry as it wasn't introduced earlier. Might be useful to refer to the results of the Data Source as 'facts' in the previous section
